README.md, before:

# $ vcspull &middot; [![Python Package](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/vcspull.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/vcspull/) [![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/vcs-python/vcspull.svg)](https://github.com/vcs-python/vcspull/blob/master/LICENSE) [![Code Coverage](https://codecov.io/gh/vcs-python/vcspull/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/vcs-python/vcspull)

Manage and sync multiple git, svn, and mercurial repos via JSON or YAML file. Compare to
[myrepos], [mu-repo]. Built on [libvcs].

Great if you use the same repos at the same locations across multiple
machines or want to clone / update a pattern of repos without having to
`cd` into each one.

- clone / update to the latest repos with `$ vcspull`
- use filters to specify a location, repo url or pattern in the
  manifest to clone / update
- supports svn, git, hg version control systems
- automatically checkout fresh repositories
- supports [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/)-style URL's
  ([RFC3986](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986)-based [url
  scheme](https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest/topics/vcs-support/))

See the [documentation](https://vcspull.git-pull.com/), [configuration](https://vcspull.git-pull.com/configuration/) examples, and [config generators](https://vcspull.git-pull.com/configuration/generation.html).

[myrepos]: http://myrepos.branchable.com/
[mu-repo]: http://fabioz.github.io/mu-repo/

# How to

## Install

```console
$ pip install --user vcspull
```

Or using uv:

```console
$ uv tool install vcspull
```

For one-time use without installation:

```console
$ uvx vcspull
```

### Developmental releases

You can test the unpublished version of vcspull before its released.

- [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/):

  ```console
  $ pip install --user --upgrade --pre vcspull
  ```

- [pipx](https://pypa.github.io/pipx/docs/):

  ```console
  $ pipx install --suffix=@next 'vcspull' --pip-args '\--pre' --force
  ```

  Then use `vcspull@next sync [config]...`.

- [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/):

  ```console
  $ uv tool install --prerelease=allow vcspull
  ```

## Configuration

Add your repos to `~/.vcspull.yaml`. You can edit the file by hand or let
`vcspull add` or `vcspull discover` create entries for you.

```yaml
~/code/:
  flask: "git+https://github.com/mitsuhiko/flask.git"
~/study/c:
  awesome: "git+git://git.naquadah.org/awesome.git"
~/study/data-structures-algorithms/c:
  libds: "git+https://github.com/zhemao/libds.git"
  algoxy:
    repo: "git+https://github.com/liuxinyu95/AlgoXY.git"
    remotes:
      tony: "git+ssh://git@github.com/tony/AlgoXY.git"
```

(see the author's
[.vcspull.yaml](https://github.com/tony/.dot-config/blob/master/.vcspull.yaml),
more [configuration](https://vcspull.git-pull.com/configuration.html))

`$HOME/.vcspull.yaml` and `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/vcspull/` (`~/.config/vcspull`) can
be used as a declarative manifest to clone your repos consistently across
machines. Subsequent syncs of initialized repos will fetch the latest commits.

### Add repositories from the CLI

Register a single repository without touching YAML manually:

```console
$ vcspull add my-lib https://github.com/example/my-lib.git --path ~/code/my-lib
```

- Omit `--path` to default the entry under `./`.
- Use `-w/--workspace` when you want to force a specific workspace root, e.g.
  `-w ~/projects/libs`.
- Pass `-f/--file` to add to an alternate YAML file.
- Use `--dry-run` to preview changes before writing.
- Follow with `vcspull sync my-lib` to clone or update the working tree after registration.

### Discover local checkouts and add en masse

Have a directory tree full of cloned Git repositories? Scan and append them to
your configuration:

```console
$ vcspull discover ~/code --recursive
```

The scan shows each repository before import unless you opt into `--yes`. Add
`-w ~/code/` to pin the resulting workspace root or `-f` to
write somewhere other than the default `~/.vcspull.yaml`.

### Inspect configured repositories

List what vcspull already knows about without mutating anything:

```console
$ vcspull list
$ vcspull list --tree
$ vcspull list --json | jq '.[].name'
```

`--json` emits a single JSON array, while `--ndjson` streams newline-delimited
objects that are easy to consume from shell pipelines.

### Check repository status

Get a quick health check for all configured workspaces:

```console
$ vcspull status
$ vcspull status --detailed
$ vcspull status --ndjson | jq --slurp 'map(select(.reason == "summary"))'
```

The status command respects `--workspace/-w` filters and the global
`--color {auto,always,never}` flag. JSON and NDJSON output mirrors the list
command for automation workflows.

### Normalize configuration files

After importing or editing by hand, run the formatter to tidy up keys and keep
entries sorted:

```console
$ vcspull fmt -f ~/.vcspull.yaml --write
```

Use `vcspull fmt --all --write` to format every YAML file that vcspull can
discover under the standard config locations.

## Sync your repos

```console
$ vcspull sync
```

Preview planned work with Terraform-style plan output or emit structured data
for CI/CD:

```console
$ vcspull sync --dry-run "*"
$ vcspull sync --dry-run --show-unchanged "workspace-*"
$ vcspull sync --dry-run --json "*" | jq '.summary'
$ vcspull sync --dry-run --ndjson "*" | jq --slurp 'map(select(.type == "summary"))'
```

Dry runs stream a progress line when stdout is a TTY, then print a concise plan
summary (`+/~/✓/⚠/✗`) grouped by workspace. Use `--summary-only`,
`--relative-paths`, `--long`, or `-v/-vv` for alternate views, and
`--fetch`/`--offline` to control how remote metadata is refreshed.

Keep nested VCS repositories updated too, lets say you have a mercurial
or svn project with a git dependency:

`external_deps.yaml` in your project root (any filename will do):

```yaml
./vendor/:
  sdl2pp: "git+https://github.com/libSDL2pp/libSDL2pp.git"
```

Clone / update repos via config file:

```console
$ vcspull sync -f external_deps.yaml '*'
```

See the [Quickstart](https://vcspull.git-pull.com/quickstart.html) for
more.

## Pulling specific repos

Have a lot of repos?

you can choose to update only select repos through
[fnmatch](http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/009695399/functions/fnmatch.html)
patterns. remember to add the repos to your `~/.vcspull.{json,yaml}`
first.

The patterns can be filtered by by directory, repo name or vcs url.

Any repo starting with "fla":

```console
$ vcspull sync "fla*"
```

Any repo with django in the name:

```console
$ vcspull sync "*django*"
```

Search by vcs + url, since urls are in this format <vcs>+<protocol>://<url>:

```console
$ vcspull sync "git+*"
```

Any git repo with python in the vcspull:

```console
$ vcspull sync "git+*python*
```

Any git repo with django in the vcs url:

```console
$ vcspull sync "git+*django*"
```

All repositories in your ~/code directory:

```console
$ vcspull sync "$HOME/code/*"
```

[libvcs]: https://github.com/vcs-python/libvcs

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/vcs-python/vcspull/master/docs/_static/vcspull-demo.gif" class="align-center" style="width:45.0%" alt="image" />

# Donations

Your donations fund development of new features, testing and support.
Your money will go directly to maintenance and development of the
project. If you are an individual, feel free to give whatever feels
right for the value you get out of the project.

See donation options at <https://tony.sh/support.html>.

# More information

- Python support: >= 3.10, pypy
- VCS supported: git(1), svn(1), hg(1)
- Source: <https://github.com/vcs-python/vcspull>
- Docs: <https://vcspull.git-pull.com>
- Changelog: <https://vcspull.git-pull.com/history.html>
- API: <https://vcspull.git-pull.com/api.html>
- Issues: <https://github.com/vcs-python/vcspull/issues>
- Test Coverage: <https://codecov.io/gh/vcs-python/vcspull>
- pypi: <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/vcspull>
- Open Hub: <https://www.openhub.net/p/vcspull>
- License: [MIT](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

[![Docs](https://github.com/vcs-python/vcspull/workflows/docs/badge.svg)](https://vcspull.git-pull.com) [![Build Status](https://github.com/vcs-python/vcspull/workflows/tests/badge.svg)](https://github.com/vcs-python/vcspull/actions?query=workflow%3A%22tests%22)

Commit message:

docs(cli): reflect duplicate-aware defaults succinctly
why: User-facing docs and README still describe the pre-merge behavior for add,
discover, and fmt; guidance should mention the new defaults without drowning out
other tips.

what:
- note that fmt merges duplicate workspace roots unless --no-merge is supplied
- explain path-based adds, confirmation flags, and duplicate handling in
  docs/cli/add.md and the README bullet list
- mention discover's default merge behavior with a concise pointer to
  --no-merge

README.md, after:

# $ vcspull &middot; [![Python Package](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/vcspull.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/vcspull/) [![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/vcs-python/vcspull.svg)](https://github.com/vcs-python/vcspull/blob/master/LICENSE) [![Code Coverage](https://codecov.io/gh/vcs-python/vcspull/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/vcs-python/vcspull)

Manage and sync multiple git, svn, and mercurial repos via JSON or YAML file. Compare to
[myrepos], [mu-repo]. Built on [libvcs].

Great if you use the same repos at the same locations across multiple
machines or want to clone / update a pattern of repos without having to
`cd` into each one.

- clone / update to the latest repos with `$ vcspull`
- use filters to specify a location, repo url or pattern in the
  manifest to clone / update
- supports svn, git, hg version control systems
- automatically checkout fresh repositories
- supports [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/)-style URL's
  ([RFC3986](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986)-based [url
  scheme](https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest/topics/vcs-support/))

See the [documentation](https://vcspull.git-pull.com/), [configuration](https://vcspull.git-pull.com/configuration/) examples, and [config generators](https://vcspull.git-pull.com/configuration/generation.html).

[myrepos]: http://myrepos.branchable.com/
[mu-repo]: http://fabioz.github.io/mu-repo/

# How to

## Install

```console
$ pip install --user vcspull
```

Or using uv:

```console
$ uv tool install vcspull
```

For one-time use without installation:

```console
$ uvx vcspull
```

### Developmental releases

You can test the unpublished version of vcspull before its released.

- [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/):

  ```console
  $ pip install --user --upgrade --pre vcspull
  ```

- [pipx](https://pypa.github.io/pipx/docs/):

  ```console
  $ pipx install --suffix=@next 'vcspull' --pip-args '\--pre' --force
  ```

  Then use `vcspull@next sync [config]...`.

- [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/):

  ```console
  $ uv tool install --prerelease=allow vcspull
  ```

## Configuration

Add your repos to `~/.vcspull.yaml`. You can edit the file by hand or let
`vcspull add` or `vcspull discover` create entries for you.

```yaml
~/code/:
  flask: "git+https://github.com/mitsuhiko/flask.git"
~/study/c:
  awesome: "git+git://git.naquadah.org/awesome.git"
~/study/data-structures-algorithms/c:
  libds: "git+https://github.com/zhemao/libds.git"
  algoxy:
    repo: "git+https://github.com/liuxinyu95/AlgoXY.git"
    remotes:
      tony: "git+ssh://git@github.com/tony/AlgoXY.git"
```

(see the author's
[.vcspull.yaml](https://github.com/tony/.dot-config/blob/master/.vcspull.yaml),
more [configuration](https://vcspull.git-pull.com/configuration.html))

`$HOME/.vcspull.yaml` and `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/vcspull/` (`~/.config/vcspull`) can
be used as a declarative manifest to clone your repos consistently across
machines. Subsequent syncs of initialized repos will fetch the latest commits.

### Add repositories from the CLI

Register a single repository without touching YAML manually:

```console
$ vcspull add my-lib https://github.com/example/my-lib.git --path ~/code/my-lib
```

- Omit `--path` to default the entry under `./`.
- Use `-w/--workspace` when you want to force a specific workspace root, e.g.
  `-w ~/projects/libs`.
- Pass `-f/--file` to add to an alternate YAML file.
- Use `--dry-run` to preview changes before writing.
- Point at an existing checkout (`vcspull add ~/projects/example`) to infer the
  name and remote; add `--yes` to skip the confirmation prompt.
- Append `--no-merge` if you prefer to review duplicate workspace roots
  yourself instead of having vcspull merge them automatically.
- Follow with `vcspull sync my-lib` to clone or update the working tree after registration.

### Discover local checkouts and add en masse

Have a directory tree full of cloned Git repositories? Scan and append them to
your configuration:

```console
$ vcspull discover ~/code --recursive
```

The scan shows each repository before import unless you opt into `--yes`. Add
`-w ~/code/` to pin the resulting workspace root or `-f` to write somewhere other
than the default `~/.vcspull.yaml`. Duplicate workspace roots are merged by
default; include `--no-merge` to keep them separate while you review the log.

### Inspect configured repositories

List what vcspull already knows about without mutating anything:

```console
$ vcspull list
$ vcspull list --tree
$ vcspull list --json | jq '.[].name'
```

`--json` emits a single JSON array, while `--ndjson` streams newline-delimited
objects that are easy to consume from shell pipelines.

### Check repository status

Get a quick health check for all configured workspaces:

```console
$ vcspull status
$ vcspull status --detailed
$ vcspull status --ndjson | jq --slurp 'map(select(.reason == "summary"))'
```

The status command respects `--workspace/-w` filters and the global
`--color {auto,always,never}` flag. JSON and NDJSON output mirrors the list
command for automation workflows.

### Normalize configuration files

After importing or editing by hand, run the formatter to tidy up keys, merge
duplicate workspace sections, and keep entries sorted:

```console
$ vcspull fmt -f ~/.vcspull.yaml --write
```

Use `vcspull fmt --all --write` to format every YAML file that vcspull can
discover under the standard config locations. Add `--no-merge` if you only want
duplicate roots reported, not rewritten.

## Sync your repos

```console
$ vcspull sync
```

Preview planned work with Terraform-style plan output or emit structured data
for CI/CD:

```console
$ vcspull sync --dry-run "*"
$ vcspull sync --dry-run --show-unchanged "workspace-*"
$ vcspull sync --dry-run --json "*" | jq '.summary'
$ vcspull sync --dry-run --ndjson "*" | jq --slurp 'map(select(.type == "summary"))'
```

Dry runs stream a progress line when stdout is a TTY, then print a concise plan
summary (`+/~/✓/⚠/✗`) grouped by workspace. Use `--summary-only`,
`--relative-paths`, `--long`, or `-v/-vv` for alternate views, and
`--fetch`/`--offline` to control how remote metadata is refreshed.

Keep nested VCS repositories updated too, lets say you have a mercurial
or svn project with a git dependency:

`external_deps.yaml` in your project root (any filename will do):

```yaml
./vendor/:
  sdl2pp: "git+https://github.com/libSDL2pp/libSDL2pp.git"
```

Clone / update repos via config file:

```console
$ vcspull sync -f external_deps.yaml '*'
```

See the [Quickstart](https://vcspull.git-pull.com/quickstart.html) for
more.

## Pulling specific repos

Have a lot of repos?

you can choose to update only select repos through
[fnmatch](http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/009695399/functions/fnmatch.html)
patterns. remember to add the repos to your `~/.vcspull.{json,yaml}`
first.

The patterns can be filtered by by directory, repo name or vcs url.

Any repo starting with "fla":

```console
$ vcspull sync "fla*"
```

Any repo with django in the name:

```console
$ vcspull sync "*django*"
```

Search by vcs + url, since urls are in this format <vcs>+<protocol>://<url>:

```console
$ vcspull sync "git+*"
```

Any git repo with python in the vcspull:

```console
$ vcspull sync "git+*python*
```

Any git repo with django in the vcs url:

```console
$ vcspull sync "git+*django*"
```

All repositories in your ~/code directory:

```console
$ vcspull sync "$HOME/code/*"
```

[libvcs]: https://github.com/vcs-python/libvcs

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/vcs-python/vcspull/master/docs/_static/vcspull-demo.gif" class="align-center" style="width:45.0%" alt="image" />

# Donations

Your donations fund development of new features, testing and support.
Your money will go directly to maintenance and development of the
project. If you are an individual, feel free to give whatever feels
right for the value you get out of the project.

See donation options at <https://tony.sh/support.html>.

# More information

- Python support: >= 3.10, pypy
- VCS supported: git(1), svn(1), hg(1)
- Source: <https://github.com/vcs-python/vcspull>
- Docs: <https://vcspull.git-pull.com>
- Changelog: <https://vcspull.git-pull.com/history.html>
- API: <https://vcspull.git-pull.com/api.html>
- Issues: <https://github.com/vcs-python/vcspull/issues>
- Test Coverage: <https://codecov.io/gh/vcs-python/vcspull>
- pypi: <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/vcspull>
- Open Hub: <https://www.openhub.net/p/vcspull>
- License: [MIT](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

[![Docs](https://github.com/vcs-python/vcspull/workflows/docs/badge.svg)](https://vcspull.git-pull.com) [![Build Status](https://github.com/vcs-python/vcspull/workflows/tests/badge.svg)](https://github.com/vcs-python/vcspull/actions?query=workflow%3A%22tests%22)
