docs/cli/import/gitlab.md, before:

(cli-import-gitlab)=

# vcspull import gitlab

Import repositories from GitLab or a self-hosted GitLab instance.

## Command

```{eval-rst}
.. argparse::
    :module: vcspull.cli
    :func: create_parser
    :prog: vcspull
    :path: import gitlab
```

## Subgroup targeting

Use slash notation to target a specific subgroup or sub-subgroup directly:

```console
$ vcspull import gl my-group/my-subgroup \
    --mode org \
    --workspace ~/code/
```

```console
$ vcspull import gl my-group/my-subgroup/my-leaf \
    --mode org \
    --workspace ~/code/
```

The `TARGET` argument accepts any depth of slash-separated group path.

## Group flattening

When importing a GitLab group with `--mode org`, vcspull preserves subgroup
structure as nested workspace directories by default. Use `--flatten-groups` to
place all repositories directly in the base workspace:

```console
$ vcspull import gl my-group \
    --mode org \
    --workspace ~/code/ \
    --flatten-groups
```

### Workspace structure by target and flag

Given a group tree `my-group → sub → leaf`, importing from `~/code/`:

| Target | `--flatten-groups` | Workspace sections written |
|--------|:-----------------:|---------------------------|
| `my-group` | no | `~/code/`, `~/code/sub/`, `~/code/sub/leaf/` |
| `my-group` | yes | `~/code/` only |
| `my-group/sub` | no | `~/code/`, `~/code/leaf/` |
| `my-group/sub` | yes | `~/code/` only |
| `my-group/sub/leaf` | no | `~/code/` only (leaf — no further nesting) |
| `my-group/sub/leaf` | yes | `~/code/` only |

When the target is already the deepest group (a leaf), `--flatten-groups` has
no effect — all repositories already land in the base workspace.

## Including shared repositories

By default, repositories shared into a group from another namespace are
excluded. Use `--with-shared` to include them when importing in `--mode org`:

```console
$ vcspull import gl my-group \
    --mode org \
    --workspace ~/code/ \
    --with-shared
```

`--with-shared` has no effect in user mode or search mode.

## Skipping subgroups

Use `--skip-group` to exclude all repositories whose owner path contains a
specific group name segment. Matching is case-insensitive and segment-based:

```console
$ vcspull import gl my-group \
    --mode org \
    --workspace ~/code/ \
    --skip-group bots
```

Repeat the flag to skip multiple groups:

```console
$ vcspull import gl my-group \
    --mode org \
    --workspace ~/code/ \
    --skip-group bots \
    --skip-group archived
```

The flag matches any path segment: `--skip-group bots` skips repos owned by
`my-group/bots` or `my-group/bots/subteam` but not `my-group/robotics`.

> **Note**: Passing the root group name itself (`--skip-group my-org` when
> importing `my-org`) will silently exclude every repository, since all repo
> paths include the root group as a path segment.

## Authentication

- **Env vars**: `GITLAB_TOKEN` (primary), `GL_TOKEN` (fallback)
- **Token type**: Personal access token
- **Scope**: `read_api` (minimum for listing projects; **required** for search
  mode)
- **Create at**: <https://gitlab.com/-/user_settings/personal_access_tokens>
  (self-hosted: `https://<instance>/-/user_settings/personal_access_tokens`)

Set the token:

```console
$ export GITLAB_TOKEN=glpat-...
```

Then import:

```console
$ vcspull import gl myuser --workspace ~/code/
```

Commit message:

docs(import[gitlab]) Note --with-shared warning in non-org modes
why: The docs said "has no effect" without mentioning the emitted warning,
which could confuse users who see it at runtime.
what:
- Append warning-emission note to the --with-shared non-org-mode sentence

docs/cli/import/gitlab.md, after:

(cli-import-gitlab)=

# vcspull import gitlab

Import repositories from GitLab or a self-hosted GitLab instance.

## Command

```{eval-rst}
.. argparse::
    :module: vcspull.cli
    :func: create_parser
    :prog: vcspull
    :path: import gitlab
```

## Subgroup targeting

Use slash notation to target a specific subgroup or sub-subgroup directly:

```console
$ vcspull import gl my-group/my-subgroup \
    --mode org \
    --workspace ~/code/
```

```console
$ vcspull import gl my-group/my-subgroup/my-leaf \
    --mode org \
    --workspace ~/code/
```

The `TARGET` argument accepts any depth of slash-separated group path.

## Group flattening

When importing a GitLab group with `--mode org`, vcspull preserves subgroup
structure as nested workspace directories by default. Use `--flatten-groups` to
place all repositories directly in the base workspace:

```console
$ vcspull import gl my-group \
    --mode org \
    --workspace ~/code/ \
    --flatten-groups
```

### Workspace structure by target and flag

Given a group tree `my-group → sub → leaf`, importing from `~/code/`:

| Target | `--flatten-groups` | Workspace sections written |
|--------|:-----------------:|---------------------------|
| `my-group` | no | `~/code/`, `~/code/sub/`, `~/code/sub/leaf/` |
| `my-group` | yes | `~/code/` only |
| `my-group/sub` | no | `~/code/`, `~/code/leaf/` |
| `my-group/sub` | yes | `~/code/` only |
| `my-group/sub/leaf` | no | `~/code/` only (leaf — no further nesting) |
| `my-group/sub/leaf` | yes | `~/code/` only |

When the target is already the deepest group (a leaf), `--flatten-groups` has
no effect — all repositories already land in the base workspace.

## Including shared repositories

By default, repositories shared into a group from another namespace are
excluded. Use `--with-shared` to include them when importing in `--mode org`:

```console
$ vcspull import gl my-group \
    --mode org \
    --workspace ~/code/ \
    --with-shared
```

`--with-shared` has no effect in user mode or search mode; a warning is
emitted if the flag is passed in those contexts.

## Skipping subgroups

Use `--skip-group` to exclude all repositories whose owner path contains a
specific group name segment. Matching is case-insensitive and segment-based:

```console
$ vcspull import gl my-group \
    --mode org \
    --workspace ~/code/ \
    --skip-group bots
```

Repeat the flag to skip multiple groups:

```console
$ vcspull import gl my-group \
    --mode org \
    --workspace ~/code/ \
    --skip-group bots \
    --skip-group archived
```

The flag matches any path segment: `--skip-group bots` skips repos owned by
`my-group/bots` or `my-group/bots/subteam` but not `my-group/robotics`.

> **Note**: Passing the root group name itself (`--skip-group my-org` when
> importing `my-org`) will silently exclude every repository, since all repo
> paths include the root group as a path segment.

## Authentication

- **Env vars**: `GITLAB_TOKEN` (primary), `GL_TOKEN` (fallback)
- **Token type**: Personal access token
- **Scope**: `read_api` (minimum for listing projects; **required** for search
  mode)
- **Create at**: <https://gitlab.com/-/user_settings/personal_access_tokens>
  (self-hosted: `https://<instance>/-/user_settings/personal_access_tokens`)

Set the token:

```console
$ export GITLAB_TOKEN=glpat-...
```

Then import:

```console
$ vcspull import gl myuser --workspace ~/code/
```
