docs/quickstart.md, before:

(quickstart)=

# Quickstart

## Installation

For latest official version:

```console
$ pip install --user vcspull
```

Or using uv:

```console
$ uv tool install vcspull
```

For one-time use without installation:

```console
$ uvx vcspull
```

Upgrading:

```console
$ pip install --user --upgrade vcspull
```

Or with uv:

```console
$ uv tool upgrade vcspull
```

(developmental-releases)=

### Developmental releases

New versions of vcspull are published to PyPI as alpha, beta, or release candidates.
In their versions you will see notification like `a1`, `b1`, and `rc1`, respectively.
`1.10.0b4` would mean the 4th beta release of `1.10.0` before general availability.

- [pip]\:

  ```console
  $ pip install --user --upgrade --pre vcspull
  ```

- [pipx]\:

  ```console
  $ pipx install --suffix=@next 'vcspull' --pip-args '\--pre' --force
  // Usage: vcspull@next sync [config]
  ```

- [uv tool install][uv-tools]\:

  ```console
  $ uv tool install --prerelease allow vcspull
  ```

- [uv]\:

  ```console
  $ uv add vcspull --prerelease allow
  ```

- [uvx]\:

  ```console
  $ uvx --from 'vcspull' --prerelease allow vcspull
  ```

via trunk (can break easily):

- [pip]\:

  ```console
  $ pip install --user -e git+https://github.com/vcs-python/vcspull.git#egg=vcspull
  ```

- [pipx]\:

  ```console
  $ pipx install --suffix=@master 'vcspull @ git+https://github.com/vcs-python/vcspull.git@master' --force
  ```

- [uv]\:

  ```console
  $ uv tool install vcspull --from git+https://github.com/vcs-python/vcspull.git
  ```

[pip]: https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/
[pipx]: https://pypa.github.io/pipx/docs/
[uv]: https://docs.astral.sh/uv/
[uv-tools]: https://docs.astral.sh/uv/concepts/tools/
[uvx]: https://docs.astral.sh/uv/guides/tools/

## Configuration

```{seealso}
{ref}`configuration` and {ref}`cli-import`.
```

We will check out the source code of [flask][flask] to `~/code/flask`.

Prefer JSON? Create a `~/.vcspull.json` file:

```json
{
  "~/code/": {
    "flask": "git+https://github.com/mitsuhiko/flask.git"
  }
}
```

YAML? Create a `~/.vcspull.yaml` file:

```yaml
~/code/:
  "flask": "git+https://github.com/mitsuhiko/flask.git"
```

Already have repositories cloned locally? Use
`vcspull discover ~/code --recursive` to detect existing Git checkouts and
append them to your configuration. See {ref}`cli-discover` for more details and
options such as `--workspace-root` and `--yes` for unattended runs. After editing or
discovering repositories, run `vcspull fmt --write` (documented in {ref}`cli-fmt`) to
normalize keys and keep your configuration tidy.

The `git+` in front of the repository URL. Mercurial repositories use
`hg+` and Subversion will use `svn+`. Repo type and address is
specified in [pip vcs url][pip vcs url] format.

Now run the command, to pull all the repositories in your
`.vcspull.yaml` / `.vcspull.json`.

```console
$ vcspull sync --all
```

Also, you can sync arbitrary projects, lets assume you have a mercurial
repo but need a git dependency, in your project add `.deps.yaml` (can
be any name):

```yaml
./vendor/:
  sdl2pp: "git+https://github.com/libSDL2pp/libSDL2pp.git"
```

Use `-f/--file` to specify a config.

```console
$ vcspull sync --file .deps.yaml --all
```

You can also use [fnmatch] to pull repositories from your config in
various fashions, e.g.:

```console
$ vcspull sync django
```

```console
$ vcspull sync django\*
```

```console
$ vcspull sync "django*"
```

Filter by VCS URL:

Any repo beginning with `http`, `https` or `git` will be look up
repos by the vcs url.

Pull / update repositories you have with github in the repo url:

```console
$ vcspull sync "git+https://github.com/yourusername/*"
```

Pull / update repositories you have with bitbucket in the repo url:

```console
$ vcspull sync "git+https://*bitbucket*"
```

Filter by the path of the repo on your local machine:

Any repo beginning with `/`, `./`, `~` or `$HOME` will scan
for patterns of where the project is on your system:

Pull all repos inside of _~/study/python_:

```console
$ vcspull sync "$HOME/study/python"
```

Pull all the repos you have in directories in my config with "python":

```console
$ vcspull sync ~/*python*
```

[pip vcs url]: http://www.pip-installer.org/en/latest/logic.html#vcs-support
[flask]: http://flask.pocoo.org/
[fnmatch]: http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/009695399/functions/fnmatch.html

Commit message:

docs(quickstart) Mention worktree support with cross-reference
why: Surface the worktree feature in the quickstart guide for discoverability.
what:
- Add brief worktree mention after the sync section
- Cross-reference cli-worktree for details

docs/quickstart.md, after:

(quickstart)=

# Quickstart

## Installation

For latest official version:

```console
$ pip install --user vcspull
```

Or using uv:

```console
$ uv tool install vcspull
```

For one-time use without installation:

```console
$ uvx vcspull
```

Upgrading:

```console
$ pip install --user --upgrade vcspull
```

Or with uv:

```console
$ uv tool upgrade vcspull
```

(developmental-releases)=

### Developmental releases

New versions of vcspull are published to PyPI as alpha, beta, or release candidates.
In their versions you will see notification like `a1`, `b1`, and `rc1`, respectively.
`1.10.0b4` would mean the 4th beta release of `1.10.0` before general availability.

- [pip]\:

  ```console
  $ pip install --user --upgrade --pre vcspull
  ```

- [pipx]\:

  ```console
  $ pipx install --suffix=@next 'vcspull' --pip-args '\--pre' --force
  // Usage: vcspull@next sync [config]
  ```

- [uv tool install][uv-tools]\:

  ```console
  $ uv tool install --prerelease allow vcspull
  ```

- [uv]\:

  ```console
  $ uv add vcspull --prerelease allow
  ```

- [uvx]\:

  ```console
  $ uvx --from 'vcspull' --prerelease allow vcspull
  ```

via trunk (can break easily):

- [pip]\:

  ```console
  $ pip install --user -e git+https://github.com/vcs-python/vcspull.git#egg=vcspull
  ```

- [pipx]\:

  ```console
  $ pipx install --suffix=@master 'vcspull @ git+https://github.com/vcs-python/vcspull.git@master' --force
  ```

- [uv]\:

  ```console
  $ uv tool install vcspull --from git+https://github.com/vcs-python/vcspull.git
  ```

[pip]: https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/
[pipx]: https://pypa.github.io/pipx/docs/
[uv]: https://docs.astral.sh/uv/
[uv-tools]: https://docs.astral.sh/uv/concepts/tools/
[uvx]: https://docs.astral.sh/uv/guides/tools/

## Configuration

```{seealso}
{ref}`configuration` and {ref}`cli-import`.
```

We will check out the source code of [flask][flask] to `~/code/flask`.

Prefer JSON? Create a `~/.vcspull.json` file:

```json
{
  "~/code/": {
    "flask": "git+https://github.com/mitsuhiko/flask.git"
  }
}
```

YAML? Create a `~/.vcspull.yaml` file:

```yaml
~/code/:
  "flask": "git+https://github.com/mitsuhiko/flask.git"
```

Already have repositories cloned locally? Use
`vcspull discover ~/code --recursive` to detect existing Git checkouts and
append them to your configuration. See {ref}`cli-discover` for more details and
options such as `--workspace-root` and `--yes` for unattended runs. After editing or
discovering repositories, run `vcspull fmt --write` (documented in {ref}`cli-fmt`) to
normalize keys and keep your configuration tidy.

The `git+` in front of the repository URL. Mercurial repositories use
`hg+` and Subversion will use `svn+`. Repo type and address is
specified in [pip vcs url][pip vcs url] format.

Now run the command, to pull all the repositories in your
`.vcspull.yaml` / `.vcspull.json`.

```console
$ vcspull sync --all
```

Want to manage multiple branches or tags of the same repository?
See {ref}`cli-worktree` for declarative worktree support.

Also, you can sync arbitrary projects, lets assume you have a mercurial
repo but need a git dependency, in your project add `.deps.yaml` (can
be any name):

```yaml
./vendor/:
  sdl2pp: "git+https://github.com/libSDL2pp/libSDL2pp.git"
```

Use `-f/--file` to specify a config.

```console
$ vcspull sync --file .deps.yaml --all
```

You can also use [fnmatch] to pull repositories from your config in
various fashions, e.g.:

```console
$ vcspull sync django
```

```console
$ vcspull sync django\*
```

```console
$ vcspull sync "django*"
```

Filter by VCS URL:

Any repo beginning with `http`, `https` or `git` will be look up
repos by the vcs url.

Pull / update repositories you have with github in the repo url:

```console
$ vcspull sync "git+https://github.com/yourusername/*"
```

Pull / update repositories you have with bitbucket in the repo url:

```console
$ vcspull sync "git+https://*bitbucket*"
```

Filter by the path of the repo on your local machine:

Any repo beginning with `/`, `./`, `~` or `$HOME` will scan
for patterns of where the project is on your system:

Pull all repos inside of _~/study/python_:

```console
$ vcspull sync "$HOME/study/python"
```

Pull all the repos you have in directories in my config with "python":

```console
$ vcspull sync ~/*python*
```

[pip vcs url]: http://www.pip-installer.org/en/latest/logic.html#vcs-support
[flask]: http://flask.pocoo.org/
[fnmatch]: http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/009695399/functions/fnmatch.html
